# Chapter II

---

# What are the features of a good program?

A good program:
- runs correctly
- is easy to understand
- is easy to design 
- is easy to modify 
- give correct results
- runs efficiently

---

# Define the terms: data, file, record, and primary key

Data: a value or set of values<br />
File: a collection of data related records<br />
Record: a collection of related records<br />
Primary key: A data item that uniquely identifies the record in the file<br />

---

# define data structures. give some examples 

A group of data elements that are put together under one name, and which defines a particular way of storing and organizing data in a computer so that it can be used efficiently<br />
Common Examples:<br />
- arrays 
- linked lists
- queues
- stacks
- binary trees 
- hash tables

---

# In how many ways can you categorize data structures? explain each term

Two ways to categorize data structures:<br />
- Primative
  - The fundamental data types supported by a programming language
  - Some basic data types:
    - Integer
    - Real
    - Character
    - Boolean

---

# In how many ways can you categorize data structures? explain each term

Two ways to categorize data structures:<br />
- Non-Primitive
  - Data structures that are created using primitive data structures
    - Linear
      - If the elements are stored in a linear or sequential order
      - Examples:
        - Arrays
        - Linked lists
        - Stacks
        - Queues
      - Can be represented two ways in memory
        - To have a linear relationship between elements by means of sequential memory locations
        - Have a linear relationship between elements by means of links
    - Non-Linear
      - Elements of data structure not stored in sequential order
      - The relationship of adjacency is not maintained between the elements
      - Examples
        - Trees
        - Graphs

---

# Discuss the applications of data structures

---

# Arrays

- A collection of similar data elements
- The elements have the same data type
- The elements of arrays are stored in consecutive memory locations and are referenced by an index
- Used when we want to store large amounts of similar data types
- Have limitations
  - Arrays are of fixed size
  - Data elements are stored in contiguous memory locations which may not be always available
  - Insertion and deletion of elements can be problematic because of shifting elements from their positions

---

# Linked lists

- A very flexible, dynamic data structure where elements form a sequential list
- The programmer does not need to worry about how many elements are stored in the list
- Enables programmers to write robust programs with less maintenance
- In the list each node is allocated space as it is added to the list 
- Every node in the list points to the next node in the list
- Every node contains two types of data
  - The value of the node or any other data that corresponds to that node
  - A pointer or link to the next node in the list
- The last node in the list contains a null pointer to indicate that it is the end or tail of the list
- Since the memory for a node is allocated dynamically the total number of nodes that my be added to a list is limited only by the amount of memory available

---

# Stacks

- A linear data structure in which insertion and deletion of elements are done at only one end, known as the top of the stack
- Has a last in first out structure because the last element added to the stack is the first element deleted from the stack
- Stacks can be implemented using arrays or linked lists 
- Every stack has a variable top associated with it
- Top is used to store the address of the topmost element of the stack
- It is this position from where the element will be added or deleted
- Max is the other variable which is used to store the maximum number if elements that a stack can store
- If top = null then the stack is empty if top = max - 1 the stack is full
- A stack supports three basic operations
  - Push: Adds an element to the top of the stack
  - Pop: Removes the element from the top of the stack
  - Peep: Returns the value of the topmost element of the stack
- Before inserting an element into the stack you have to check overflow conditions
- Before deleting an element from the stack you have to check for underflow conditions 
  - An underflow is when you try to delete from a stack that is already empty

---

# Queues

- First in first out data structure where the element that is inserted first is the first one to be taken out
- The elements in a queue are added at one end called the rear and removed from the other end called the front
- Like stacks queues can be implemented by arrays or linked lists
- Deletions are only done from the end of the queue
- You have to check for overflow and underflow conditions in a queue
- When the queue is full rear = max - 1
- When queue is empty front = NULL and rear = NULL

---

# Trees

- A non-linear data structure consisting of collection nodes arranged in a hierarchical order
- One node is the root node and the remaining nodes can be partitioned into disjoint sets so each set is a sub-tree node
- The simplest tree is a binary tree
  - Consists of a root node and left and right sub-trees, where both sub-trees is also a binary tree
  - Each node contains a data element, a left pointer which points to the left sub-tree and a right pointer which points to the right sub-tree
- The root element is the topmost node which is pointed by a ‘root’ pointer
- If root = NULL the tree is empty

---

# Graphs

- A non-linear data structure which is a collection of vertices and edges that connect the vertices 
- Often viewed as a generalization of the tree structure where instead of a purely parent to child relationship between tree nodes any kind of complex relationship between the nodes can exist
- In trees nodes can only have one parent but in graphs it does not matter
- A node in the graph can represent a city and the edges connecting the nodes can be roads 
- A graph can represent a computer network where the nodes are workstations and the edges are network connections
- Graphs do not have a root node 
- Every node in the graph can be connected with every other node in the graph
- When two nodes are connected via an edge the two nodes are known as neighbours

---

# Write a short note on different operations that can be performed on data structures

- Traversing
  - Accessing the data items one at the time to process that data item. The example given in the book is to access the names of the students in a database to print them out
- Searching
  - Finding the location of one or more data items given a constraint. The data items that are being searched may not exist. The example given in the book is searching all the students that got 100 in Math
- Inserting
  - Adding a new data item to the list of data items. The example given in the book is adding a new students that joined a course
- Deleting
  - Opposite of Inserting. Deleting a data item from the list of data items. The example given in the book is removing a student that left a course
- Sorting
  - Arranging the data items in some order such as ascending or descending. Sorting of data items can change dispensing on what the type of application is. The example in the book is sorting student names in alphabetical order
- Merging
  - Merging two lists of data items in a single list. An example would be merging the list of graduates with the list of students that studied here but not anymore

---

# Compare a linked list with an array

---

# Arrays

- Arrays are a collection of similar data items. These data items will contain the same type of data such as int or char. Arrays are declared in the following form - type name[size].
- Arrays have a few disadvantages such as:
  - Arrays have a fixed size
  - Data elements are stored in contiguous memory locations which are not always available
  - Inserting or deleting data elements can be problematic because the data elements shift from their original position

---

# Linked Lists

- A linked list is a very flexible data structure. In linked lists elements are called nodes that form a sequential list. This means that they can be used to write low maintenance, robust programs.
- In the linked list, each node is allocated a space as it is added to the list. Each of the nodes are pointing to the node next to them, this means that every node in the list has two types of data:
  - The data that they contain (int, char, etc.)
  - The pointer to the next node on the list
- The last node on the linked list points to NULL indicating that we are the end of the list or the tail of the list

---

# Write a short note on abstract data type.

Abstract data is what operation can be performed on the data rather than what the data is. This way an end user can use the data without having to care about what the data is.

---

# Explain the different types of data structures. Also discuss their merits and demerits.

There are only four types of data structures:<br />
- Primitive data structures
  - Primitive data structures are those data structures that are supported by the programming language
- Non-primitive data structures
  - Non-primitive data structures are those data structures that are created using primitive data structures. It can be divided into two sub categories
    - Linear data structures: If the elements are stored in a linear or sequential order, then its a linear data structure
    - Non-linear data structures: If the elements are not stored in a linear or sequential order, then its a non-linear data structure

---

# Define an algorithm. Explain its features with the help of suitable examples

“A formally defined procedure for performing come calculation” written instructions for doing a calculation. A programming language can be used to implement (use) a procedure which has been defined. An algorithm: solves a problem, provides an answer and always ends.<br />
Three control structures used in algorithms are:
- Sequence: the steps are done in an order
- Decision: when the next step depends on the outcome of a condition. The IF construct is IF condition Then process. A condition is a statement that evaluates to for example a true value or a false value. Also the IF-ELSE construct is IF condition Then process1 ELSE process2. 
- Repetition: one or more steps are performed for a number of times. Constructs: while, do-while, for loops. They perform steps until a condition is true. 

---

# Explain and compare the approaches for designing an algorithm

- Top-down approach: Turn a complex algorithm into modules and sub-modules, you add modules that the topmost module calls, start abstract and then add in the modules, easy for documentation, difficult for reusing components because modules are designed independent from each other
- Bottom-up approach: design the lower level modules that perform the operations, then group together the sub-modules and implement higher level modules by using operations performed by the lower level modules. Allows information hiding, hard to only use bottom-up, so both should be used.

---

# What is modularization? Give its advantages.

Smaller units are called modules, and smaller smaller units are sub-modules, turning a complex algorithm into modules is modularization. Modules are designed independently and make debugging and maintenance easier. 

---

# Write a brief note on trees as a data structure

There is one root node which the others branch off of. They make sub-trees and are hierarchical. Trees are nonlinear which means elements are not stored in sequential order. A binary tree has a root node and left and right sub-trees which are themselves binary trees. Each node has a data element, a left pointer and a right pointer. The root node has a root pointer and if root = NULL then the tree is empty.

---

# What do you understand by a graph?

A graph is a collection of nodes and edges to connect them. Every node can be connected to another and there are no parents. Nodes connected to another are neighbors. Algorithms can find the shortest path between the nodes of a graph. Graphs are good at modelling real world situations. 

---

# Explain the criteria you will keep in mind while choosing an appropriate algorithm to solve a particular problem?

- Sequence: Each step of an algorithm is executed in a specific order
- Decision: The execution of a process depends on the outcome of some condition
- Repitition: Executing one or more steps for a number of times

---

# What do you understand by time-space trade-off? 

Sacrificing CPU time to execute or memory space for the sake of making an algorithm work

---

# What do you understand by the efficiency of an algorithm?

- Linear Function
  - The efficiency of a linear algorithm is given as the number of instructions it contains
- Loop Functions
  - Linear Loops
    - General efficiency is f(n) = n, depends on the number of iterations
    - Iteration is either by adding or subtracting
  - Logarithmic Loops
    - General efficiency is f(n) = log(n)
    - Iteration is either by multiplication or division
  - Nested Loops
    -   Depends on number of iterations each loop completes, total is product of number of iterations in the inner loop and number of iterations in the outer loop

---

# How will you express the time complexity of a given algorithm?

The way to express time complexity of a given algorithm is the function f(n) where n is the input sizer for a given distance of the problem being solved

---

# How will you express the time complexity of a given algorithm?

The way to express time complexity of a given algorithm is the function f(n) where n is the input sizer for a given distance of the problem being solved

---

# Efficiency based on the number of iterations of loop

---

# Linear loops

eg 1. f(n) = n
```
for(i=0;i<100;i++)
  statement block;
```
eg 2. f(n) = n/2
```
for(i=0;i<100;i+=2)
  statement block;
```

---

# Logarithmic loops

When a loop incrementer is multiplied or divided the number of iterations = log(n) = f(n)<br />
eg 1. f(n) = log(1000)
```
for(i=1;i<1000;i*=2)
  statement block;
```
eg 2.  f(n) = log(1000)
```
for(i=1000;i>=1;1/=2)
  statement block;
```

---

# Nested loops

Number of iterations is equal to the product of the iterations of the inner loop and the outer loop<br />
Linear logarithmic loops:<br />
f(n) = nlog(n) f(n) = 10 log (10)
```
for(i=0;i<10;i++)
  for(j=0; j<10; j*=)
    statement block;
```
Quadratic loops:(br />
f(n) = n2      f(n) = 100
```
for(i=0;i<10;i++)
  for(j=0; j<10; j++)
    statement block;
```
Dependent quadratic loops:<br />
f(n) = n (n + 1)/2 f(n) = 55
```
for(i=0;i<10;i++)
  for(j=0; j<=1; j++)
    statement block;
```

---

# Discuss the significance and limitations of the Big O notation. 

Big O notation is a means of expressing the time complexity of an algorithm, which is used to predict how input sizes affect the complexity of a program, and determine which algorithm is most efficient. Big-O provides the upper bound prediction of algorithm complexity. 

An upper bound prediction means that a program will run that number of iterations or less. Think about it like an upper bound of time.

---

# Limitations of Big-O:

- Some algorithms are too difficult to mathematically model and predict
- It may not be possible to determine the average case for an algorithm
- Big-O does not consider the efficiency of algorithms, or difficulty of programming an algorithm
- Ignores constants
  - eg. In regards to time complexity these algorithms are equal O (n2) = O (1000000000n^2)

---

# Discuss the best case, worst case, average case, and amortized time complexity of an algorithm. 

- Worst Case Running Time of an Algorithm: Testing of algorithms under the worst possible conditions. Specifically, the algorithm input is random. This is considered the lower bound of an algorithm because any other input should be more efficient.
- Best Case Running Time of an Algorithm: When an algorithm is tested under optimal conditions. This is not usually a deciding factor in algorithm selection. 
- Average Case Running Time of an Algorithm: This is the estimated running time for an average algorithm input. 
- Amortized Time Complexity of an Algorithm: This analysis takes the worst case and average case running time to determine the speed of an algorithm. 
